# MODEL0911989198: Fenton1998_MyocardiumVortexDynamics

## Installation

Download this repository, and install with distutils

`python setup.py install`

Or, install using pip

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/MODEL0911989198.git`

To install a specific version (in this example, from the 2014-09-16 BioModels release)

`pip install git+https://github.com/biomodels/MODEL0911989198.git@20140916`


# Model Notes


This a model from the article:  
**Vortex dynamics in three-dimensional continuous myocardium with fiber rotation: Filament instability and fibrillation.**   
Fenton F, Karma A. _Chaos_ 1998 Mar;8(1):20-47
[12779708](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12779708) ,  
**Abstract:**   
Wave propagation in ventricular muscle is rendered highly anisotropic by the
intramural rotation of the fiber. This rotational anisotropy is especially
important because it can produce a twist of electrical vortices, which
measures the rate of rotation (in degree/mm) of activation wavefronts in
successive planes perpendicular to a line of phase singularity, or filament.
This twist can then significantly alter the dynamics of the filament. This
paper explores this dynamics via numerical simulation. After a review of the
literature, we present modeling tools that include: (i) a simplified ionic
model with three membrane currents that approximates well the restitution
properties and spiral wave behavior of more complex ionic models of cardiac
action potential (Beeler-Reuter and others), and (ii) a semi-implicit
algorithm for the fast solution of monodomain cable equations with rotational
anisotropy. We then discuss selected results of a simulation study of vortex
dynamics in a parallelepipedal slab of ventricular muscle of varying wall
thickness (S) and fiber rotation rate (theta(z)). The main finding is that
rotational anisotropy generates a sufficiently large twist to destabilize a
single transmural filament and cause a transition to a wave turbulent state
characterized by a high density of chaotically moving filaments. This
instability is manifested by the propagation of localized disturbances along
the filament and has no previously known analog in isotropic excitable media.
These disturbances correspond to highly twisted and distorted regions of
filament, or "twistons," that create vortex rings when colliding with the
natural boundaries of the ventricle. Moreover, when sufficiently twisted,
these rings expand and create additional filaments by further colliding with
boundaries. This instability mechanism is distinct from the commonly invoked
patchy failure or wave breakup that is not observed here during the initial
instability. For modified Beeler-Reuter-like kinetics with stable reentry in
two dimensions, decay into turbulence occurs in the left ventricle in about
one second above a critical wall thickness in the range of 4-6 mm that matches
experiment. However this decay is suppressed by uniformly decreasing
excitability. Specific experiments to test these results, and a method to
characterize the filament density during fibrillation are discussed. Results
are contrasted with other mechanisms of fibrillation and future prospects are
summarized. (c)1998 American Institute of Physics.

This model was taken from the [CellML
repository](http://www.cellml.org/models) and automatically converted to SBML.  
The original model was: [ **Fenton F, Karma A. (1998) - version05**
](http://www.cellml.org/models/fenton_karma_1998_version05)  
The original CellML model was created by:  
**Noble, Penny, J**   
penny.noble@dpag.ox.ac.uk  
Oxford University  
Department of Physiology, Anatomy & Genetics  

This model originates from BioModels Database: A Database of Annotated
Published Models (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/). It is copyright (c)
2005-2011 The BioModels.net Team.  
To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

In summary, you are entitled to use this encoded model in absolutely any
manner you deem suitable, verbatim, or with modification, alone or embedded it
in a larger context, redistribute it, commercially or not, in a restricted way
or not..  
  
To cite BioModels Database, please use: [Li C, Donizelli M, Rodriguez N,
Dharuri H, Endler L, Chelliah V, Li L, He E, Henry A, Stefan MI, Snoep JL,
Hucka M, Le Nov√®re N, Laibe C (2010) BioModels Database: An enhanced, curated
and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic models. BMC Syst
Biol., 4:92.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20587024)


